---
title: Aug 21-25
---
# P1
- [x] Y fractindex diff?
- [x] Litefs
	- [ ] Now update Strut to use it via new ws-server
- [x] RX-Cache
- [ ] Update to latest nightly rust build
- [ ] crsql_next_db_version --- the actual thingy... keep record of max in current tx
	- [ ] keep max, don't re-select on every tx. Use `data_version` to determine if re-select required.
	- [ ] Create new test of many connections writing then and merging?
- [ ] Primary key compaction
- [ ] Network https://github.com/vlcn-io/cr-sqlite/issues/38#issuecomment-1670071715
- [ ] Reactivity Extension
- [x] Typed SQL Bugs
	- [ ] TypedSQL bind types
- [ ] Fly.io -- seq consistency?
	- [ ] Do not ignore `seq` if it is inserted with a changeset


- Rooms
- RX-Cache
- High-perf Sync, 1 btn clk. Beefy primary? Has different run cmd for primary? E.g., to run the Java/Go process.


---
- Non litefs version.. Just edge nodes with volumes?
- Forwarding changes to one another for durability or edge access?

Still have needs of strong consistency tho.

LiteFS questions:
- Different primaries for different DBs? Rather than one primary managing all writes for _all_ dbs?
- Different "app" to act as primary altogether. E.g., beefy highly concurrent Java app.
- Wrapping LiteFS to provide 1 click deploys w/ cr-sqlite correctly wired up. "Press a button, get a litefs + crsqlite setup" Partykit setup?

# Notes
1. as_ordered seems bugged in the latest strut port.
	1. Write some py tests to figure this out
2. Our DB cache likely has some correctness problems. Maybe masked by the fact that cached values are immediately removed after query completion? So it is just coalescing duplicate queries dispatched at same time.
	1. rx-cache will fix this
	2. rx-cache against ahp against synchronous opfs should be... big wins
3. use point and range queries broken but we can fix via rx-cache
4. Roy's build for rx-cache might not be the best given his sync build still uses async on step?
	1. Maybe best starter given that's where we're at and shouldn't matter to rx-cache since it'll be internal to that api
5. create virtual table syntax for ordered columns

Still remaining:
- Causal Log
- Counter
- Fugue


Pay...

---

BG:
- R&D LM Collab
- Deletion, Data collection, DYI, Secure DBs, Case Management, Inv Tooling, Privcy
	- EntSchema, EntIntegrity, EntLambda

My focus:
On device.
Embedded DBs don't solve the needs of app developers today.

- Collab / Multiplayer
- Latency
- Offline edits

When SQLite came out, users generally had a single device.
2010 - many device
2020 - many device + multiplayer/collab are table stakes, reactive patterns too

Why can our DB not solve these for us?
- Rx
- Sync (multiplayer / collab / offline support)
- Sharing / RLS

Why cr-sqlite?
Looked at edge and:
	- Edge still doesn't solve network hiccups, offline and multiplayer problems
	- Cost is still a factor with edge
	- More complex now that you're... replicating part of your dataset?
		- Getting data to device problem still exists

Orig plan: Postgres/mysql/whatev integration
Why looking at D1, Litefs, Turso and things now?
- Currently compatible with SQLite, quickest way to "go to market" 
- Hinges on / unanswered:
	- Use cases for "db per doc"? "db per user"?
	- "internet of files"

Next up:
- Rich text (docs)
- Causal Log (chat like, comment stream)
- Counter
- rx-cache
- postgres?

