---
title: "july 10-14, 2023"
---

https://github.com/sqlite/sqlite/blob/master/src/prepare.c#L684

test that cache is not growing w/o bound? you have a cache test tho righ?

- CRDT Base
	- [ ] p1: re-insertion
	- [ ] p1: col level trigger rather than table level so we can deal with pk adjustment
	- [x] p1: warn on auto-increment use
	- [ ] p1: automigrator stability
	- [x] p2: unpack columns table valued function
	- [ ] p2: vtab syntax
	- [ ] p2: turso crsqlite direct from browser
	- [ ] vite-express rather than forking a process?
	- [x] test p2p still works with new networking code..
- Fly.io
	- [ ] provide count of changed db versions post merge
- DevX / Starting
	- [ ] Hooks for read-only access or other permission rules
	- [ ] Document plan for [[row level security]]
- TypedSQL
	- [x] split that PR into `typed-sql` and `typed-db`
- Other
	- [ ] Webkit bug report for WASM JIT
	- [x] [[Beyond CRDTs, The Next Frontier of Local-First]]
		- [x] https://2023.splashcon.org/home/plf-2023
	- [ ] Garden index
- Riffle
	- [ ] IVM / inverted DB approach
		- [ ] Hash - needs to be varargs.
		- https://github.com/nalgeon/sqlean/blob/ab0e7e2173328fadad492673fbdd4851a6d3f9e6/src/crypto/extension.c#L198
		- https://github.com/nalgeon/sqlean/blob/main/src/crypto/sha1.c
- Vision
	- [ ] Frontpage guide
		- [ ] automigrator
	- [x] [[Beyond CRDTs, The Next Frontier of Local-First]]

what actually happened:
- typed sql
- execution distraction
- start rust conversion

# Scratch
col-specific-triggers:
- update on pk ... always means delete of the old thing?
- insert on pk ... don't need col specific triggers for pk insert. Only on insert of row to create or increment the CL sentinel.
- delete on pk ... don't need. Only need delete on row to update sentinel.

Implement delete-wins / existing behavior with CL sentinel instead of pko and delete sentinels?
Then move it to CL proper?

- add pko on insert

So we only need col specific triggers for update?
Inserts should overwrite clock values anyway for the new model given we compare on CL.

Yeah, I'm sure we're coming from pretty different backgrounds.

Backing up --

There's a bunch of problems when it comes to managing state on a rich client like a mobile app or single page app in the browser. Once you throw sync and multiplayer into the mix it gets really hard.

My main thesis is that client side applications would benefit greatly from leveraging a database. The use of SQLite is pretty common on iOS and Android but the database still doesn't handle reactivity, syncing offline edits, loading data from the server, or multiplayer in those environments.

- Reactivity -- The lack of reactivity means data flow often becomes a tangled web of observers
- Syncing Offline Edits -- Not being able to sync changes made while offline means the developer finds themselves implementing it themselves through some operation queue and manually writing conflict resolution code.
- Loading data from the server -- this is the most radical but if the client DB could load data from the server (just treating it as another storage layer after the disk) data fetching should get simpler on the client.
- Multiplayer -- this is similar to the making changes while offline. Developers are left to their own devices to figure out how to implement multiplayer experiences.

So I have pretty strong opinions on what the solution looks like of course always open to real world feedback of users.



The general maturity curve for state in an app is something like:

1. Keep everything in memory. Save and load the entire blob on app open and exit and maybe some interval
2. The blob starts getting big so devs partition it into different documents
3. 

My main thesis is that frontend development would benefit greatly from having a database on the frontend.