---
title: "July 31-04 2023"
---

# P1
- [ ] Expo demo incremental sync fix
- [x] Reply to James on hooks
- [x] Reply about hrly rate
- [x] Finish re-insertion 😬
- [ ] Finish vtab syntax
- [ ] Finish migrator bugs
- [x] Cut metadata weight
- [x] Resolve TypedSQL bugs in Overtone (overlap with other sql tags, mainly)
- [ ] Add undo/redo to vite-starter
- [ ] presence and temp tables...
- [ ] sah pool migration
	- [ ] no asyncify?
- [x] update wa-sqlite
- [ ] zip delivery of extensions to eliminate rename
- [x] null row record means causal length of 1
- [ ] Incremental merge for Expo demo...

# P2
- [ ] Fugue?
- [ ] Front page story?
- [ ] 1 year post?
- [ ] Publish roadmap?

# P3
- [ ] Braid preso?
- [ ] Community sync

talk to https://twitter.com/artman ?


# Notes
- review https://github.com/expo/expo/pull/23791
- compression to reduce insertion time? more insertion testing to figure out where non-linearity comes from?
- Android native library -- https://blog.arik.io/compiling-c-code-as-android-shared-libraries-6924803c00db

- Use re-insertion in Strut
	- Use typed-sql there too then
	- fixup the db cache as well then?
	- update the vite starter to include re-insertion?

- Swap to a deno starter? https://deno.land/manual@v1.35.3/node/how_to_with_npm/vue

## Compression

Other ideas...

All in a single row? What db version would this row be tagged with?
The largest version of the latest change?
Then what cells should be pulled from it?
Always all cells since we don't know the other cell versions..

Ok for querying tho...
We can pack all db versions but leave 1 unpacked for querying.

Would change delivery time of cells by quite a bit to be bundled in further out transactions.


- cid from table_info, grabbed in returned order, in memory
	- migrations create temp table to re-number metadata if col names get new numbers
- site_id in own table
- pks... last frontier


Sync whole row on every change.... They can manually normalize if they need finer grained sync.
- Row would have db version, not cell.
- Cells have col versions still tho however.
- Can get rid of default value or null requirement(s)

Can we do col level sync while doing row groups?

For in-order merge yes. Do 2-phase commit. Gather rows together and insert at once.


```sql
SELECT COALESCE(
	(SELECT __crsql_col_version FROM "hoot__crsql_clock" WHERE "b" IS 1 AND __crsql_col_name = '-1'),
	(SELECT 1 FROM "hoot__crsql_clock" WHERE "b" IS 1)
)
```


@seed(98817124127868963542241055112675129876)


```
The deals I have with Expo.dev and Fly are a bit simpler.

In that they are both driving the integrations and having me consult / review diffs / add missing features to cr-sqlite.

This works well since it isn't a huge mental tax trying to get familiar with their products, how cr-sqlite should be integrated, how to integrate it, etc.

With turso it's a bit reversed. My driving an integration into your product. So I think th
```


timing:
```
insert into fee WITH RECURSIVE    cte(id) AS (       SELECT random()       UNION ALL       SELECT random()         FROM cte        LIMIT 100000  ) SELECT id, NULL as foo FROM cte;
```

Best way to handle row level security?
Whole db sync with filter scales to some level.

Query based sync is the other option but how to query based sync in an incremental way?

This is a good start: Parametrized query per table? Joining clock tables where db_version > x?

Arbitrary queries that get col version information tacked onto return results? So they are mergable?