---
title: Sep 25-29 2023
---
# P1
- [ ] Turso
	- [x] Close hook doesn't exists for loadable extensions?
	- [ ] fails to compile integration check for turso? Just move on to latest commits with newer integration check?
- [ ] cr-sqlite
	- [ ] compress out column names
	- [ ] Server compensations and examples
	- [ ] Native Network
	- [ ] db-version update as col-version
	- [ ] WebSocket permissions example
	- [ ] Text, Counter, Causal Log
	- [ ] DB Version for Col Version
		- [ ] How to do server compensations and invariant preservations
			- [ ] vtab triggers? 2phase commit? Run after all write of the block are done?
		- [ ] Full tx or no tx in server centric setup?
- [ ] Website
	- [ ] Schedule meeting link
	- [ ] Promotional copy on each segment reactive/relational/sync/etc.
- [x] NextJS starter with useFormHook?
	- [x] doesn't work
- [ ] auto-prepare mutations and queries for user?
- [ ] multi-hook
	- [ ] duckdb subs? oltp pref?
- [ ] Optimistic Tables rather than CRRs
	- [ ] hold db version
	- [ ] full tx or no tx
- [x] Compact complete
- [ ] Components
	- [ ] Materialite - Rx
	- [ ] Mirrolite - Mirrored, read-only
	- [ ] Optilite - Optimistic
- [ ] Full block based network layer and buffer for fidelity transactions
- [ ] Read tracking ever?
- [x] Leak test
- [ ] sqlite expert to auto-generate indices?
	- [ ] https://sqlite.org/forum/forumpost/74f18021fe

# P2
- [ ] Puzzle piece connect example


---

# Notes:

- Replacing column names with cids will let us fix rowid pretty easily. Since we'll have the cid for rowid compensation.

- Tbl schema version? Stored in... crsql_meta? And can send over network? And compare? And reject merge if delta?


- Ensure table infos up to date... optimized.
	- crsql_alter should nuke the prepared statements. but another connection could have altered. So we must ensure up to date and nuke prepareds... call once per tx? pragma schema version is the thing...

```sql
UPDATE "foo__crsql_clock" SET "b" = ? WHERE "a" IS ? AND __crsql_col_name != '-1'
```

## Mtg:

See if there's a way to work together. Less cagey. Improve the space overall.

TypedSQL thesis is raw sql which may be wrong.

- Waterfall, blinking
- Controlled inputs
- Transactions per second, relaxed durability or async persist
- IVMs on main thread for sync update? DB on worker?
	- Rollback would roll back ivm?

- Rx, papers, simple version, decomposed queries, figma live graph (https://www.figma.com/blog/livegraph-real-time-data-fetching-at-figma/)
- GraphQL as inspo. Need trees. Component tied to query is perfection.
- TypedSQL & TreeSQL
	- Needs bind param typings
- TreeSQL
	- Waterfall problem
- Permissions
	- What hasn't been sent problem
- Speed run
- Initial rx cache before full IVM
- Controlled inputs, vanilla fetch

# Notes

```
"SELECT t1."a", t1."b" FROM "foo" AS t1
        WHERE NOT EXISTS
          (SELECT 1 FROM "foo__crsql_pks" AS t2 WHERE t1."a" IS t2."a" AND t1."b" IS t2."b")"
```

- rowid: Mult each number by 100 and incr for cols.
- convergent output from prior version, compare to current
	- expected final state compare script?

## Rx Incremental for Electric

- Prepare
- De-duped queries
- De-duped prepared (link to forum)
- IDB Transactions (read tx and keeping open)
- Exclusive and Relaxed IDB (streaming from IDB roy post)
- Safari Issues (O3)
- React event loop problems
- --
- WASM bridge cost
- Async interface cost (event loop tripping)
- Worker tripping cost
- Batch re-run in WASM no round trip, scheduled too?



---

- Rowid fixup...
- column name compaction
	- CIDs. They should never change unless the schema is altered...
		- Should we check them after re-pulling table info? To catch drift?
- reactivity plan(s)

A new write API that allows for synchronous updates of reactive queries.
Lazily persist in BG.
We need to allow partial writes then.. What if the write uses SQL to select stuff to use to write with? Then we can't get synchronous update.

1. How much space savings for Strut DBs? Or vite starter?
2. cids mean on alter we need to record the last cid set and compare against the new cid set to find removed columns and such. Convert old CIDs to names, convert new CIDs to names, find missing. A func to lookup col_name from old cid mapping and a func to look up col_name from new cid mapping. Used in backfill queries and compact queries.

---

Yeah, there's two sides of a spectrum here:

A - the DB is the single source of truth of all app state and literally every keystroke, drag, scroll, etc. goes through it.
B - treat the DB more like some remote data store and debounce, throttle, collapse, etc. events going to it

B quickly requires some new layer on top of the database (let's call it the in-memory model) since, if you're not going through the DB for everything, components need some other way to observe changes. E.g., responding to drags, hovers, keystrokes. Sometimes local component state is enough for this but often since the state may be shared across the component tree. TlDraw would be a good example of that latter case.

As you mention, dealing with bi-directional merging is also a big problem to work out since you have dirty state that diverges from DB state which can change underneath you.

Another problem is dealing with state updates to the in-memory model that fail to write to the DB. You could move as much logic as possible that could cause a transaction to fail into the in-memory model. E.g., permissions, data validation, check constraints. That's a lot of mechanics to re-create though.

Last issue with B is when your in-memory model doesn't quite have the same shape as the various ways the UI needs the data.

(B) or an in-memory model is certainly the traditional way of doing all of this and there's a ton of choices in that direction -- TinyBase, Signia, Mobx, ReactQuery, CoreData, etc.

In my ideal world, however, I'd go with A. I'd have some magical database that I could make any number of complex queries against and all those query results would be instantly updated on any write and all of this would take place at 60fps.

This solves:
- UIs that need data in different formats
- The single source of truth problem
- Merging states between peers, tabs, devices, etc.
- Transactionality of state updates
- Keeping everything up to date with the latest data

Johannes has actually been able to do this in his music app Overtone. Literally every keystroke, hover event, scroll, etc. is a db write and all UI components get their state directly from DB queries. We built some query caching and query de-duplication but it was pretty simple. The big problem is that you have to have a full database copy in-memory. The other thing was to make sure we didn't query data that wasn't visible. Display realestate is only so big so there's only so many queries to keep active at once.

There's been quite a number of breakthroughs in incremental view maintenance so I think A is possible now. It's a question of how much work and if there's incremental value along the way.



Then there's A. I like A given it keeps dataflow unidirectional, keeps a single copy of the data, and all the mechanics of transactions and constraints stay managed by the DB.